CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to data sources
## Overview
All data in PANO is updated weekly via a continuous integration pipeline. Every sunday night, the most recent copy of the google sheets data source is downloaded and any new entries to the data are run through a validation script to ensure that proper formatting is kept. If the validation passes, the downloaded copy will be pushed to RStudio Shinyapps and the updated data set will be reflected on the main PANO site.
## Adding new data
Any new data to be added to the main plot page of PANO can be directly added to the [google sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nWcS0UrfvnPupAwb4uvaMeY7CqmFqIu09F3I9k4ND3s/edit#gid=0) with appropriate writing permissions.
Data should be added directly to the data tab. It is important to note that when adding a new row to the data sheet, ALL columns must be filled out. If there is no data for a particular column, add the appropriate Nonetype value to the row. ![](examples/data-source.png)

### Numerical Columns
When adding data to numerical columns, note that all Nonetype values (NA, None, etc.) must be written as `NaN` for validation to pass properly. This is due to the processing that occurs in the R script. ![](examples/num-col.png)
### Categorical Columns
When adding data to categorical columns, note all Nonetype values must be written as `NA` for the validation to pass properly. It is also important to note that only certain data values are allowed for categorical columns to pass the validation. If any changes are being made to which column values are acceptable for a specific categorical column, they can be modified in the `validation/categorical_key_values.json` file and pushed to github following the best practices outlined below.![](examples/cat-col.png)

# Overview of repo
- `app/` folder contains all files and csv's required to run the web application
- `validation/` folder contains all files needed to do the weekly data update

Flowchart of weekly data update logic:
![](examples/pano_logic_diagram.png)

# Hosting through RStudio Shinyapps
The PANO application is hosted via [shinyapps](http://shinyapps.io/). All management and analytics regarding usage can be accessed through the associated shinyapps account. Deploying and stopping running instances must also be controlled through the account.

# Best practices regarding development
- All development is encouraged to occur on the dev branch and be merged into the master branch via a pull request


# Contributing walkthrough

## Get the project code on your local machine

### Fork the repository
![](examples/fork.png)
This will allow you to have your own copy of the project and helps keep the development process modular. For more information on forks, see: https://help.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo

### Clone the repository
- Open your teminal application and choose a location where you want to store this project
- Using git, clone the repository by typing `git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/intervention-outcomes.git`
    - Replace YOUR_USERNAME with your github username in the command above
### Checkout the `dev` branch
- In your terminal, type `cd intervention-outcomes` to enter the project directory
- Next type `git checkout dev`, this will change your copy of the project code to the development branch
    - For more info on branching in git, see: https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/

## Make/test changes
Edit the code on the `dev` branch as you would like and keep the master branch functional until you have tested/verified that the changes are not "code breaking".

## Commit/push changes
- Commit (make a snapshot) your changes on your local machine by typing `git commit -m "DESCRIPTION_OF_CHANGES"` in your terminal
    - Replace DESCRIPTION_OF_CHANGES with an actual description in the command above
- Push your changes to the remote machine (aka the github website) by typing `git push origin dev` in your terminal

## Merge into master branch and make a pull request
Once the `dev` branch is confirmed to be stable, you can create a pull request on github ![](examples/pr.png)

# Syncing walkthrough
## Regular sync
Normally to sync your local copy of the code with what is on github under the HBClab account, you can run `git pull origin master` when inside your local directory. To sync your local copy with the dev branch, run `git pull origin dev`.
## Forked copy sync
If your repository was forked from HBClab and there is now a repository called intervention-outcomes under your username, you can sync with your own repository using `git pull origin master` or `git pull origin dev` for the dev branch. To sync with the HBClab repository, use `git pull upstream master` or `git pull upstream dev` since upstream refers to the original repository which had the code base. (in this case the HBClab repository) 
## Merge conflicts
Occasionally if two people are working on the same code, merge conflicts can occur when git tries to combine two different copies of the same modified repository. For example, if someone made a change to the `README.md` and pushed their changes to github, but you have separate changes on your copy of the code locally, git doesn't know which version it should keep. To fix merge conflicts, git will modify the code so both copies appear and the user must manually remove the copy they don't want to keep. A merge conflict can appear when you try the above commands by using git pull and the unmerged code will look like the following: ![](examples/merge-conflict.png)
More information on dealing with merge conflicts can be found [here](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/using-branches/merge-conflicts).

Commit message:

add info for how to check local changes to code

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to data sources
## Overview
All data in PANO is updated weekly via a continuous integration pipeline. Every sunday night, the most recent copy of the google sheets data source is downloaded and any new entries to the data are run through a validation script to ensure that proper formatting is kept. If the validation passes, the downloaded copy will be pushed to RStudio Shinyapps and the updated data set will be reflected on the main PANO site.
## Adding new data
Any new data to be added to the main plot page of PANO can be directly added to the [google sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nWcS0UrfvnPupAwb4uvaMeY7CqmFqIu09F3I9k4ND3s/edit#gid=0) with appropriate writing permissions.
Data should be added directly to the data tab. It is important to note that when adding a new row to the data sheet, ALL columns must be filled out. If there is no data for a particular column, add the appropriate Nonetype value to the row. ![](examples/data-source.png)

### Numerical Columns
When adding data to numerical columns, note that all Nonetype values (NA, None, etc.) must be written as `NaN` for validation to pass properly. This is due to the processing that occurs in the R script. ![](examples/num-col.png)
### Categorical Columns
When adding data to categorical columns, note all Nonetype values must be written as `NA` for the validation to pass properly. It is also important to note that only certain data values are allowed for categorical columns to pass the validation. If any changes are being made to which column values are acceptable for a specific categorical column, they can be modified in the `validation/categorical_key_values.json` file and pushed to github following the best practices outlined below.![](examples/cat-col.png)

# Overview of repo
- `app/` folder contains all files and csv's required to run the web application
- `validation/` folder contains all files needed to do the weekly data update

Flowchart of weekly data update logic:
![](examples/pano_logic_diagram.png)

# Hosting through RStudio Shinyapps
The PANO application is hosted via [shinyapps](http://shinyapps.io/). All management and analytics regarding usage can be accessed through the associated shinyapps account. Deploying and stopping running instances must also be controlled through the account.

# Best practices regarding development
- All development is encouraged to occur on the dev branch and be merged into the master branch via a pull request

## Testing changes locally before pushing to github/dockerhub
A good rule of thumb for development is to always see how a change to a piece of code is reflected on the developers own computer before pushing to online resources. Following the steps above to clone the repository on your own machine, the R Shiny app can be opened in R Studio. Once the project is opened and the app.R file is selected, R Studio will recognize that the file is a shiny app and will provide a button to run the app on the local machine (at the top-right of the code window). ![](examples/local-app.png)
Clicking the Run App button will allow you to see how the current version of the code on your local machine is running the application, this is encouraged to be used throughout the development process before anything is committed to github or deployed to Shinyapps.io


# Contributing walkthrough

## Get the project code on your local machine

### Fork the repository
![](examples/fork.png)
This will allow you to have your own copy of the project and helps keep the development process modular. For more information on forks, see: https://help.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo

### Clone the repository
- Open your teminal application and choose a location where you want to store this project
- Using git, clone the repository by typing `git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/intervention-outcomes.git`
    - Replace YOUR_USERNAME with your github username in the command above
### Checkout the `dev` branch
- In your terminal, type `cd intervention-outcomes` to enter the project directory
- Next type `git checkout dev`, this will change your copy of the project code to the development branch
    - For more info on branching in git, see: https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/

## Make/test changes
Edit the code on the `dev` branch as you would like and keep the master branch functional until you have tested/verified that the changes are not "code breaking".

## Commit/push changes
- Commit (make a snapshot) your changes on your local machine by typing `git commit -m "DESCRIPTION_OF_CHANGES"` in your terminal
    - Replace DESCRIPTION_OF_CHANGES with an actual description in the command above
- Push your changes to the remote machine (aka the github website) by typing `git push origin dev` in your terminal

## Merge into master branch and make a pull request
Once the `dev` branch is confirmed to be stable, you can create a pull request on github ![](examples/pr.png)

# Syncing walkthrough
## Regular sync
Normally to sync your local copy of the code with what is on github under the HBClab account, you can run `git pull origin master` when inside your local directory. To sync your local copy with the dev branch, run `git pull origin dev`.
## Forked copy sync
If your repository was forked from HBClab and there is now a repository called intervention-outcomes under your username, you can sync with your own repository using `git pull origin master` or `git pull origin dev` for the dev branch. To sync with the HBClab repository, use `git pull upstream master` or `git pull upstream dev` since upstream refers to the original repository which had the code base. (in this case the HBClab repository) 
## Merge conflicts
Occasionally if two people are working on the same code, merge conflicts can occur when git tries to combine two different copies of the same modified repository. For example, if someone made a change to the `README.md` and pushed their changes to github, but you have separate changes on your copy of the code locally, git doesn't know which version it should keep. To fix merge conflicts, git will modify the code so both copies appear and the user must manually remove the copy they don't want to keep. A merge conflict can appear when you try the above commands by using git pull and the unmerged code will look like the following: ![](examples/merge-conflict.png)
More information on dealing with merge conflicts can be found [here](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/using-branches/merge-conflicts).
